# Contributing Guidelines

## Git structure

The active branch is `development`. `development` is merged into `main` for releases. Please submit your pull requests to `development`.

## Repository structure

This repository is structured as a standard R package following the conventions outlined in the [R Packages](https://r-pkgs.org/) book. A few additional files are provided that are not part of the built
R package and are listed in `.Rbuildignore`, such as `.travis.yml`, which is used for continuous testing and integration.

## Code

All code for this package is found in `R/`. All functions should be thoroughly documented with `roxygen2` notation; see Documentation. Code should conform to the tidyverse [Style guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/index.html).

## Testing

Any new feature or bug-fix should include a unit-test demonstrating the change.  Unit tests follow the `testthat` framework with files in `tests/testthat`.  Please make sure that the testing suite passes before issuing a pull request.  This can be done by running `check()` from the `devtools` package, which will also check for consistent documentation, etc.

## Documentation

All of the function documentation is generated automatically. Please do not edit any of the documentation files in `man/` or the `NAMESPACE`.  Instead, construct the appropriate [roxygen2](https://github.com/klutometis/roxygen) documentation in the function files in `R/` themselves.  The documentation is then generated by running the `devtools::document()` function.  Please consult the [R Packages](https://r-pkgs.org/) book if this workflow is unfamiliar to you.  Note that functions should include examples in the documentation. Please use `\dontrun` for examples that take more than a few seconds.

Similarly, the `.md` files in the base directory should not be edited directly. Instead, edit the `.Rmd` source files.

## Dependencies

This package already contains a large number of dependencies (imports and suggests). Therefore, new packages should only be added when creating new features that cannot be reasonably achieved within the existing set of dependencies.

## General Development Goals & Guidelines

1. Contribute code to create, use, and convert ecocomDP datasets.
2. Maintain a consistent user-facing API.

## Attribution

These contributing guidelines are based on those of the [rOpenSci emld project](https://github.com/ropensci/emld/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).
